Welcome back to Gary’s Economics.
Today we are going to talk about
Rishi Sunak’s taxes and how the rich live.
Okay.
So I wanted to do a video on
a story that came out a couple of months ago
about Rishi Sunak’s tax return,
because I think that the way
it was reported in the media was,
it totally didn’t tell us the true story.
Focused completely on the wrong thing
and I think we can learn a lot
about how the rich live,
what rich people's lives are like,
and what real wealth is like by looking at this story.
So this story, some of you might have seen it.
It came out in the beginning of February,
and it was about Rishi Sunak releasing his tax return.
And all of the
newspaper reports focused exactly on the numbers
and the percentage rate of tax that Rishi Sunak paid.
So I've got the story here.
I'm looking at the BBC version of the story
and it says here Rishi
Sunak paid UK tax of £508,308 on an income of
just over £2.2 million,
which means he paid a tax rate of something
like 23% or something like that.
And the story, basically
everyone ran the same version of the story,
which was Rishi
Sunak is paying 23% tax
and ordinary high earners are paying 40
or maybe 50% tax, once you include national insurance.
And as soon as I saw this story,
the thing that jumped out at me was not
Rishi Sunak's rate of tax that he paid.
That is not unusual.
In fact, most
very wealthy people pay
a lot lower rates of tax than that.
The thing that jumped out at me was one number
was obviously immediately wrong in this story,
and nobody mentioned it.
So I've spoken a lot about Rishi Sunak’s net worth
on this channel,
Sunday Times rich list had Rishi Sunak's net worth
something like £730 million.
The most recent one,
I think that it came down to £550, £560 million,
something like that.
Now imagine let's take a conservative estimate
that the real number is £500 million.
In reality, it's probably higher
because rich people often hide their wealth.
But let's take a conservative estimate £500 million.
Imagine you’re Rishi Sunak. £500 million.
What is going to be your net passive income?
Your passive income you’re getting from £500 million.
But at the moment Bank of England
base rate is about 5%.
You could get 5% interest rates on a savings account.
So if Rishi Sunak was to take his £500 million
and put it into a savings account,
he would be making £25 million
a year passive income.
He's not including his payment
he gets for being prime minister, anything like that.
£25 million a year passive income.
How can it be
that a man who makes £25 million
a year passive income,
only makes £2 million a year?
It just it doesn't make any sense to me.
And as soon as I saw that number,
as soon as I saw that article,
I really wasn't interested in the tax rate he paid.
I was interested in
how can it be that his reported income is so much less
than what he's really income is?
So I can basically tell you now
the reason why his reported income is so low.
Number one is because very wealthy
people like Rishi Sunak,
most of their wealth is in assets,
and in many cases, most of their income
from wealth comes in the form of capital gains,
which is the price of their assets going up.
And capital gains only get taxed
when you sell the asset.
If you don't sell the asset,
then this is what's called unrealised capital gains.
It doesn't get taxed in our system.
So there's no tax payable.
And basically
if you hold a load of assets
and the prices go up
and up and up, as long as you don't sell anything,
then you don't have to put anything on your tax return
at all.
So, you know, Rishi Sunak,
the only reason that his income is even
£2 million is because he happened
to sell
a lot of stock in the US investment fund that he had,
which netted him a £1.8 million capital gain.
If he didn’t sell that,
then his income would only have been...
It says it here, £400,000.
So the first thing is rich
people can very, very effectively hide their income
by owning assets.
That the price goes up
when they don't sell the assets.
You know, even if we have to accept that Rishi
Sunak’s income is £2 million,
he will never have to sell any assets.
If you
make £2 million a year,
you don’t have to sell anything,
which means you don’t have to declare anything,
which means you have to pay tax on anything.
But the real reason, the main reason
why Rishi Sunak is able to declare such a low income
is because most of Rishi Sunak’s
family wealth is owned by Rishi Sunak’s
wife,
and Rishi Sunak's wife
who has had many articles written about her
in many cases doesn't pay any tax
because she was a non-dom,
a lot of her income is overseas.
She doesn't have to pay tax on it here.
Okay. Let's explain the situation more clearly. Okay.
So Rishi Sunak is on his own,
a relatively wealthy man.
It's difficult to know exactly how these Rishi Sunak’s
wife is enormously, unbelievably wealthy.
She's worth half a billion pounds, maybe £1 billion.
Rishi Sunak’s wife's father-in-law
is one of the richest men in the world.
He's worth 3 to £4 billion, something like this.
So Rishi Sunak is declaring £2 million income.
Rishi Sunak's wife,
we know is making something like 30 or £40 million
passive income a year.
Rishi Sunak's wife's
father, he's worth say, let's say £3 billion,
if he's making 5%.
Now these are conservative estimates and normally
very wealthy people make much more than 5%.
If he makes 5% on £3 billion
he’ll be making £150 million a year.
So what you have here is a man, Rishi Sunak,
saying that he makes £2 million a year
when his wife makes
£1 million a week
and his wife’s father makes 3 or £4 million a week.
So what you have here
is a really good example of how
rich people
live, essentially,
which is the money is held in the family,
they make enormous amounts of passive income.
Their work income is basically irrelevant,
but they only pay tax on their work income
and they only show you their work income.
And I think this is...
It's a fascinating
example, really,
of how effectively
the rich are able to hide their income.
So imagine you’re Rishi Sunak,
some people will say, listen, that's not his money,
It's his wife's money.
Imagine you’re Rishi Sunak and you're getting paid
something like £200,000 - £300,000
a year to be prime minister.
Your wife makes £1 million a week,
your father-in-law makes 3 or £4 million a week.
What are your financial interests?
You know, you get paid up
a couple hundred grand a year to be prime minister
and your wife make £1 million a week.
Her dad makes £4 million a week.
What are your financial interests?
Are your financial interests
to take care of the country?
Or are your financial interests
to do what your wife and your father-in-law say?
I've never met Rishi Sunak.
He could be a perfectly nice guy.
He could be someone who doesn't care about money.
He could be someone who doesn't care
about his financial interests.
But people who don't care
about their financial interests don't normally
work for Goldman Sachs,
then go do a business degree at Stanford
and then marry the daughter
of one of the richest men in the world.
So I think what you see here
is how the rich live.
They own everything,
but they basically hide it in their taxes.
They hide in their tax returns.
I think probably the most
interesting thing about this article
is how the media completely bought it.
When I saw this,
the only interesting thing in this article
is that Rishi Sunak's income is wrong,
£2.2 million, which is Rishi Sunak declared
income is nothing for Rishi Sunak’s family.
It's meaningless for Rishi Sunak’s family.
They make twice that
every single week in passive income.
It's totally meaningless.
And I think
this makes me think of the first time
Rishi Sunak came to prominence,
I was very interested because
I'm a student of history.
I'm very interested in medieval history,
and I'm also obviously very interested
in economics and politics.
And anyone who's interested
in economics and politics will know
political parties are funded
in many cases by rich people.
They have very rich funders, which means that
when they make their decisions,
when they make their policies,
they have to be very careful not to upset rich people
because they get a lot of their money
from rich people.
they have to be very careful
not to upset the newspapers,
which in many cases are owned
by extremely rich people,
because they upset the newspapers,
then the newspapers can turn the public against him,
and they’ll lose elections.
So what this means is for,
you know, for a long period of time,
wealthy people have influenced political parties
from behind closed doors.
And this is a very
useful position for a rich person to be in,
because you can basically dictate the policies,
you can keep your own taxes low, for example,
and you don't have to give up your anonymity.
So these guys can live lives of luxury.
They can kind of control the political system,
and you don't even have to know who they are.
So it's a great situation for them to be in.
when Rishi Sunak came out and became chancellor
and latterly became prime minister,
it was interesting for me
because why would you want to be the prime minister
take a load of sh*t, lose a load of privacy
when the rich were already controlling policy anyway?
Not only is it a load of work and a load of hassle
that Rishi Sunak doesn't need,
it makes it
increasingly obvious to the general public
what was previously kind of hidden,
which is that rich people control policy.
And this kind of reminds me
of the thing that happened in history
back in the sort of 1200’s, 1300’s
when a lot of wealthy,
when basically when banking
was invented in Europe, especially in Italy,
a lot of very wealthy families were created
because they started to make a ton of money
from banking.
You had families like the Medicis in Florence.
We have the banking families of Genoa, in
Venice, these very wealthy banking families,
they made a huge amount of money
and they became as rich as kings.
And at that time, kings sort of ruined everything.
But they weren't really respected
because they weren't from aristocratic families.
So what did they do?
They started to think, how can we use our money
to buy prestige, to buy respect and to buy power?
And they started to do things like, well,
what I'm going to do is
I'm going to give my banking empire to my first son,
and I'm going to use my second son
and my third son, my daughters,
to try and marry into power, basically.
You know, I'm going to try and
marry my daughter to the King of France
to try and get her powerful.
I'm going to try to get my son to be pope,
this kind of thing.
We're going to try to use our family
to build connections
and really, Rishi
Sunak came
in, what I saw was an extremely wealthy man thinking,
well, I'm going to give my empire to my son.
Maybe I can use my daughter
to effectively become prime minister of England.
And if you consider Rishi Sunak,
he's making
£200,000 a year from being prime minister
and he's making £3 million
a week from being part of one of the richest
families in the world,
what are his financial interests
and who is he really working for?
I think this is the big question
that needs to be asked here.
But I think
the most interesting thing here is basically.
Number one.
The wealthy are hiding their wealth,
Rishi Sunak is hiding their wealth.
They're not paying enough taxes.
But number two, they are trying to rebrand themselves
as a kind of aspirational kind of normal, because...
So Rishi Sunak,
all of his income,
his all of his wealth
is tied up in stocks and shares
that he
can basically release as much income
as he wants by selling assets year by year.
He's chosen this year
to release £2.2 million of income.
When we know that that could have been £300,000,
it could have been...
It could have been £50 million if he wanted.
He's chosen to say my income is £2.2 million.
I think that is actually
a tactical choice for Rishi Sunak,
because when he says I make £2.2 million,
what he says is, I make the kind of money
that a very successful banker makes, that
a very successful businessman
makes, that an ordinary family
aspires for their kids to make one day.
And what he is doing there is he's saying,
I, Rishi Sunak,
who is part of one of the richest families
in the world that makes millions of pounds
every week in passive income, I’m
just like what you aspire your kids to do.
And I think he's trying to basically draw
a connection
between the financial situation of the super rich,
Rishi Sunak’s
family is definitely part of the super rich
and what ordinary people aspire to be.
And,
in reality very, very few people ever make £2 million.
But it is the kind of money
that an ordinary family can aspire to make.
You know,
they're ordinary families
who have
seen the value of their housing
go up to something like £2 million,
especially if you live in a big city like London.
You know, I made £2 million
in one year, despite
coming from a very poor background.
So this kind of money is aspirational,
the kind of money that Rishi Sunak’s family,
is, is totally impossible to achieve.
And what he's trying to do here
is rebrand the wealth of the super rich as the wealth,
the aspirational wealth of the middle class.
And he's trying to build the connection
between the super rich and
an aspirational middle class family.
And the reason he’s trying to do
that is so that when people like me
say, look the problem is the rich,
you need to tax
the rich,
ordinary people like you
who are not super rich
but aspire to own property,
aspire to financial security.
Think I'm going to tax you
because you think that your financial situation
is similar to Rishi Sunak's, but it's not.
So, to conclude.
Rishi Sunak doesn't pay 25% taxes.
He pays virtually 0% taxes
because Rishi Sunak’s family income is not £2 million
a year. It's hundreds of millions of pounds a year.
Because they are billionaires.
They want you to think they're normal.
So that when I say tax the rich, you hear tax you.
These guys get richer and richer every year.
They use their hundreds of millions of pounds
of passive income to compete with you,
to compete with your kids,
for your assets, for your homes,
for the things that you need.
They get richer every year. You get poorer every year.
If you don't tax them.
You are refusing to defend yourself
from the people who are coming for your homes.
You have to tax the rich.
You have to tax people like Rishi Sunak.
If you don't tax them, you kids will be poor.
That's why I do what I do every week.
Tell your friends, tell you mum.
Tax the rich or your kids will be poor.
It's inequality. You've got to fix it. Thank you.